#labels Phase-Deploy
== instructions on building from the iLife branch ==

= Introduction =

The developers have been using/developing on the iLife branch for over half a year now.
We think it's about time to push things towards stable.
We invite the daredevils amongst [http://dotmac.googlecode.com/svn/wiki/images/plotgraph.png you] to try installing from the iLife branch - and give us feedback.

==Supported Features==
==== Current status ====

10.5 "Leopard"
  * .Mac prefpane
  * iSync
  * iDisk
  * iDisk sync
  * Backup
  * iPhoto '09 gallery publishing
  * iWeb '09 publishing

_(*note - the iLife branch dropped support for os 10.4. As iLife 09 was introduced, our main focus moved there. Don't expect us to backport our changes to iLife 08)_

= Install =

Install is globally the same as from trunk.

We moved to a db backend for auth. This means we got rid of the .htdigest files.
You'll need to have (a patched) apache httpd >= 2.2 for being able to use the new backend.
_(on older apache versions; you'll still be able to install - you'll just need to keep the db in sync with your .htdigest
files. Consult the README.txt in ./private/obsolete for instructions)_

In your httpd.conf make sure you enable `mod_dbd.so` and `mod_authn_dbd.so`, you'll also need to make sure
you installed apr-util-sqlite.

Besides the perl modules needed for trunk we need a few more (available from CPAN):
 * LWP::UserAgent
 * JSON
 * Apache::Session::File
 * DateTime
 * DateTime::Format::HTTP
 * POSIX
 * Compress::Zlib
 * DBI
 * DBD::SQLite
 * Image::ExifTool
 * Imager

Before installing Imager, *you'll need to make sure to have jpeg headers installed*. On common linux distibutions these are packaged as libjpeg-devel. On Mac OS Leopard google is your friend.
 
(the list might not be complete - please let us know when you find missing modules)

Also make sure you enable mod_rewrite in your Apache config

The hosts you'll need to enter in /etc/hosts on your client machines:
{{{
###.###.###.### www.mac.com web.me.com syncmgmt.mac.com idisk.mac.com idisk.me.com configuration.apple.com lcs.mac.com certinfo.mac.com delta.mac.com notify.mac.com publish.mac.com publish.me.com homepage.mac.com webservices.mac.com web.mac.com gallery.mac.com photocast.mac.com m3.mac.com
###.###.###.### www.mac.com. web.me.com. syncmgmt.mac.com. idisk.mac.com. idisk.me.com. configuration.apple.com. lcs.mac.com. certinfo.mac.com. delta.mac.com. notify.mac.com. publish.mac.com. publish.me.com. homepage.mac.com. webservices.mac.com. web.mac.com. gallery.mac.com. photocast.mac.com. m3.mac.com.
}}}

==Gallery==
Getting gallery.yourdomain.com working requires you (besides configuring it in dotmac.conf) to replace the hardcoded 'yourdomain.com' some times.
 * ../cache/gallery.html (1x)
 * ../cache/g/javascripts/gallery.js (3x)
 * when yourdomain is not a `.com` domain - you also have to fix the extension in gallery.js. To do this, search for `.com` in gallery.js; it should be your 4th hit (at line #162 - saying: `return path.replace(/http:\/\/.+?\.com\/.+?\//,'');)`; replace `.com` with your extension. _we're looking for a more permanent solution_ Can people please verify if replacing the whole statement with `return path.replace(/http:\/\/.+?\.[a-zA-Z]{2,3}\/.+?\//,'');` works for them - and give feedback.


We've opened a [http://code.google.com/p/dotmac/issues/detail?id=88 new issue] where we hope to gather your experiences/issues. Please help us out making this page complete.


= Notes =

 * iPhoto and iWeb publishing have only been tested with iLife '08 with latest updates. We won't support earlier versions/revisions.
 * On some older Apache versions the ./private dir should be writable by Apache